Stories of community organization that succeeds in counteracting self-serving corporate agenda are not common. The uprising of segments of the general population for a unifying purpose in opposition of injustice is admired and supported, yet underneath the advocacy is often a feeling that no matter how loud their voice, it will wind up falling on deaf ears. The average person identifies with a movement for equality but may only be cautiously optimistic about its impact, resigned to the all-too-regular outcome that the few in power are going to push ahead anyway, with little regard for the desires of the people who protest their greed.
We The People: The Market Basket Effect documents a rare case in American society where the will of its common people prevailed. The backstory is the quintessence of the American dream. The Demoulas family emigrated from Greece to Lowell, Massachusetts at the turn of the 20th century and went on to establish a small enterprise of regional grocery stores with an egalitarian model: make shopping affordable for the working class and share the wealth and benefits with your employees. The Market Basket grocery chain became one of the most successful of its kind in the country and under the leadership of patriarchal son and CEO Arthur T. Demoulas, established an unusually loyal customer and employee base.
But a thriving business masked internal strife among family members and shareholders on how to run it. In 2014, the board of directors, dissatisfied with a business model viewed to be overly generous, removed Arthur T. from his position of control. The public backlash over this move attracted national attention, with the employees and customers who had benefited from “Artie T’s” practices, abandoning Market Basket entirely and demanding his reinstatement.
The significance of this documentary’s message speaks for itself, and the production value reflects the priority of getting it across. Apart from a narrated background of the Demoulas family history and industrious ascension (before inter-familial legal disputes over the estate plagued it for over a decade), the filmmakers stick to interviews of scholars, public officials and those in the media that witnessed first hand a consumer and labor revolution. The animation of the story is provided by the real time footage of the protests that they were opportunistic in capturing, sensing that a momentous occurrence in social history was taking place.
The reward of following the coverage of these events as they played out comes through seeing how community organization, galvanized by the tools of social media, was directly responsible for reversing corporate action that always seems unstoppable and impervious to public sway.
At a time when widening income disparity and the shrinking of the middle class is such a weighted issue in America - a discouraging national trend that led to the Occupy Wall Street movement and the massive swell of support for Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign - this is a story that actually gives one hope, even if all of its complexity can’t be investigated in its duration on film. Its significance is summed up best by one of the interviewees: “The dream of a more egalitarian society became real here …The game can change, The rules can change.” 