Reel Brief: An inspirational doc, tame domestic narrative, ’80s homage and rude comedy
Life, Animated, Our Little Sister, Sing Street and The Boss among theatre and DVD releases.

By Peter HowellMovie Critic
Bruce DeMaraEntertainment
Thu., July 21, 2016

Life, Animated

Directed by Roger Ross Williams. Opens July 22 at Hot Docs Ted Rogers Cinema. 89 minutes. STC
The amateurish home movies portray the Suskind family living the dream, until the day 3-year-old Owen “vanished.”
The seemingly happy and active child suddenly starts to undergo a series of unsettling changes, such as being unable to sleep and loss of motor skills. A burgeoning vocabulary is replaced by gibberish.

“It’s like we were looking for clues to a kidnapping. Someone kidnapped our son,” recalls father Ron Suskind, a former national affairs reporter for the Wall Street Journal.
Life, Animated portrays the 20-year journey of Owen from difficult childhood to young adulthood. The story opens with him weeks away from leaving an adult program for people with autism and preparing to live on his own independently.
Director Roger Ross Williams’ storytelling skills are at their finest in an engaging story suffused throughout with emotion that never descends into mawkishness
One revelation stands out: Owen’s ability to relate to animated Disney films — he identifies with Peter Pan, the boy who won’t grow up, and others — and how that near obsession plays a role in his own ability to communicate and develop an understanding of a complex world.

Williams make fine and (fortunately) sparing use of animation to show the world through the eyes of a lost little boy who discovers allies and hope in his battle against dark forces.
Owen himself is a warm and delightful presence, facing the issues every young man has to deal with — a girlfriend, a breakup, getting a job — with equanimity, courage and humour.
Intelligent and heartfelt without ever being heavy-handed, Life, Animated is sublimely inspirational filmmaking. 