What a relief to get away from Hogwarts. No more school rules, no more snitches (golden or otherwise), no more droning teen-agers stuck in the Scottish countryside. It is only while watching “Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them,” directed by David Yates and adapted by J. K. Rowling from her book, that you realize how cramped the world of Harry Potter had become in the later films. They felt yawningly long, yet far too hermetic for their own good—obsessed with wizard-on-wizard action, and forgetting that what makes wizardry compelling, rather than whimsical, are the sparks that fly when it clashes or grinds against the iron of ordinary lives.
Hence the pleasure of a solid place at a specific time: New York, 1926. Any non-magical mortal, whom Harry would call a muggle, is known here as a no-maj, and any no-maj lucky, or unlucky, enough to see a monster gets obliviated—given a memory wipe, as Tommy Lee Jones was at the end of “Men in Black.” That is the fate confronting Jacob Kowalski (Dan Fogler), definitely no relation of Stanley’s, who visits a bank to request a loan, meets an English eccentric named Newt Scamander (Eddie Redmayne), and, after a mixup over suitcases, goes home with a portable bestiary. Before you know it, there’s an escaped whatchamacallit—half platypus, half mole—filching jewellery and cash, and a mega-rhino with a glowing horn marauding through Central Park in search of a mate. If you ever wondered what magical sex would look like, now you know.
Like Casey Affleck, Redmayne keeps glancing down or aside, although in his case you sense a blatant ploy, designed to pull us into Newt’s endearing shyness. The result, like his floppy haircut, is too quaint for a hero, but the rest of the cast is a sturdy gang, headed by Katherine Waterston as Tina Goldstein, an investigative agent with unearthly powers, and Alison Sudol as her sister Queenie, a mind-reading flirt. They are instantly clad in evening gowns—hey presto!—to enter a speakeasy, and the loveliest sight, in a movie generously laced with charm, is a strudel that makes and bakes itself in midair, at Queenie’s command, to feed the hungry Jacob. I wanted more of Samantha Morton to balance the sweetness; she plays the boss of an orphanage, a pale-eyed human bully who suspects that wizards are afoot and yearns to crush them. As often with Rowling, the details out-linger the plot, though the villain is quite a novelty—not any sort of creature but an Obscurus, a parasitic spitting cloud of wrath. It’s an expensive update on the black scrawl that appeared above Lucy’s head, in “Peanuts,” when super-crabbiness loomed. In all, the movie is a cunning and peppy surprise, dulled only by the news that no less than four sequels await. Will the spell not wear off before then?
