Bad Santa 2
Critic's rating: 2 out of 5 stars
You can only be original once.

When “Bad Santa” came out in 2003, it was a revelation — a gleefully profane flipping of the bird to feel-good holiday movies. Billy Bob Thornton’s character, Willie Soke, was an original: a drunken louse encased in a vomit-stained Santa suit, not because he was full of holiday cheer but because it gave him entry into malls, where he and his elf-size accomplice could pull inside jobs, ripping off stores after hours.
One of the strengths of Terry Zwigoff’s film was how fully it committed to the idea of a depressed drunk burping out “ho ho ho” as more of an obscenity than a greeting (and that wasn’t the only obscenity in his arsenal). He was despicable, true, but part of what made him palatable was that however much he hated everyone else, he hated himself more.

The film proved influential, with plenty of foul-mouthed, bad-behaving characters trying to reach the heights — make that depths — that Willie did.


Now he is back and not, alas, better than ever (Zwigoff is not back, replaced by Mark Waters).

Willie’s still living in Phoenix, still drunk, still employment-challenged and still bad at suicide. The one person who can stomach him, Thurman Merman (Brett Kelly), is 21, but kind of a man-child (he’s on the autism spectrum, he explains with glee).

Then a package arrives: Marcus (Tony Cox), his former elf-partner and would-be killer, is out of prison and has a can’t-miss job for Willie. All he has to do is crack a safe in Chicago — at a children’s holiday charity, naturally — split the $2 million payday and move on with his life.

When you’re dealing with self-loathing misanthropes, however, you run into problems.

Chief among them is Sunny Soke (Kathy Bates — yes, Kathy Bates), Willie’s estranged mother; if anything, she’s more loathsome than he is. Willie initially refuses to work with her, but that can’t last. Grudgingly he moves forward with their plans to rip off the charity, run by the seemingly goody-goody Diane (Christina Hendricks) and her sleazy husband, Regent (Ryan Hansen).

The plot takes a backseat to the insults and gross-out lines. Fine, maybe, but it’s been done — in the 2003 film. Lauren Graham is gone, but Willie winds up in another unlikely sexual relationship, and even the dirty talk Graham made famous (infamous?) is repeated.


Besides Bates and a grown-up Thurman (Kelly is good), there is not much new here. Thornton’s Willie still insults anything and everyone, and remains rather indiscriminate, shall we say, when it comes to sexual partners. There are some laughs, sure, but not enough. It was funny the first time. This is the second time, and returns diminish accordingly.


'Bad Santa 2,' 2 stars
