n 2001, exasperation with a certain film genre reached such heights as to produce a work called, literally, Not Another Teen Movie. Fifteen years later, a few bright spots (Mean Girls, Juno, The Spectacular Now) haven’t quite dispelled the sense that the Venn diagram between angsty white teenagers and meaningful art has drifted into two non-overlapping circles. Revising that graphic is The Edge of Seventeen, the new film from first-time writer-director Kelly Fremon Craig. It courses through high school like a puff of wind, at once funnier, sweeter, more specific, and more heartbreaking than all of the tropes it expertly whips up. (It is also pure oxygen in a week where many of us are still choking on the news cycle.) What a great reminder: While adolescents may be melodramatic creatures who thrive on clichés, stories about adolescents don’t have to be.This standard-issue teen trauma cuts surprisingly deep: Nadine’s mother (Kyra Sedgwick) clearly “chose” Darien over her other child, and her dad, who really got her, died when Nadine was 13. Four years later, the universe appears to have chosen Darien, too: He radiates well-adjusted success, while Nadine’s natural moroseness has matured into crabby impatience with the world at large. After her only ally succumbs to her brother’s incontrovertible jawline, the prospect of Krista “choosing” Darien so terrifies Nadine that she bullies her into … choosing Darien. That’s when—lonelier, angrier, and more prone to interrupting Mr. Bruner’s lunch hour than ever before—Nadine sets out to ruin her life in earnest.
Helping her along on that front is Nick (Alexander Calvert), the rebel hottie who works at Petland and whom Nadine dreams of ravishing “in front of all the tropical fish. It’d be spiritual.” (Petland also gives Steinfeld the opportunity to utter the most haltingly wonderful pick-up line: “Could you … point me … in the direction … of the cat litter?”) Meanwhile, adorable nerd Erwin (Hayden Szeto, stealing every scene) gently angles for Nadine’s affections. Both boys are types-turned-real by the funniness of the writing and the strength of their performances. Pinocchio went from puppet to human by proving his “bravery and truthfulness”—Edge of Seventeen likewise transcends its tropes by being just a bit truer, sadder, and bolder than it needs to be
