The Perfect Match
By Daniel Gelb
1½ stars
The Perfect Match looks to explore the constantly changing world of modern romance—well, sort of. Although it name-drops Snapchat and Vine and features a character who obsessively rides around on a hoverboard, this flick honestly could have been plucked out of any era. The Perfect Match is a risk-free and conventional take on love, one in which marriage and baby fever are the only real options for successful adults.
Charlie Mack (Terrence J) is a Los Angeles playboy. He works as an entertainment agent at a firm that caters to high-profile clients (that is, if you consider Brandy and French Montana “high profile” in 2016), but in his heart, his true passion is photography. Charlie lives in a lavish Hills mansion, where a steady stream of gorgeous women drop by for one-night stands and then promptly disappear (which is just how he likes it). A career lothario who detests the idea of commitment, he has to endure constant razzing about his woman-hopping ways from his best friends Rick (Donald Faison) and Vic (Robert Christopher Riley), as well as from their significant others Pressie (Dascha Polanco) and Ginger (Lauren London). So naturally, as Vic and Ginger’s wedding approaches, the three men agree to a bet: Charlie has to stay with one girlfriend for the month leading up to the ceremony, as a test to see if he develops some real feelings.
That woman turns out to be the stunning yet coy Eva (Cassie Ventura), whom Charlie falls head over heels for after some sultry nights and playful days together. However, their burgeoning relationship heads way south when he discovers a secret she’s been keeping. This sends ol’ Chuck into a brooding, alcohol-fueled spiral, which ultimately reveals that his issues stem from the death of his parents at a young age. Can he get it together before he alienates those closest to him? Spoiler alert: Yeah, he can.
The Perfect Match is long on secondary plot lines and very short on laughs, despite the best efforts of Scrubs alum Faison. Charlie’s sister Sherry (Paula Patton), a hyperactive psychiatrist, manages to unpack his emotional baggage in a 60-second scene, which totally undermines what could have been an interesting wrinkle in this traditional, beaten-to-a-pulp rom-com scenario. In the end, this lethargic effort from Honey director Bille Woodruff doesn’t have nearly enough jokes or emotionally involving moments.
