Documentary about the 2007 murder of a British student in Italy gets the woman in the centre of the storm to speak up
This week's top pick is a documentary about a real-life killing, and it is a film that will arouse more tension and suspense than the other works of action and mayhem out this period.
Amanda Knox (NC16, 92 minutes, now on Netflix, 4 out of 5 stars) scores one journalistic coup by getting the woman at the centre of the storm to speak on camera, then scores another one by weaving a compelling story of deception - not carried out by murder suspect Knox, but by ourselves, when our thought processes are short- circuited by deeply buried biases.
The November 2007 murder of British student Meredith Kercher in Perugia, Italy, sold millions of newspapers and generated millions more clicks for news sites, not only because of its lurid context (there were allegations that the killing was a sex game gone wrong), but also because both the victim and the alleged killer, her flatmate, were attractive young women.

The news reports at the time now look ridiculous. These alleged that Knox did not appear sufficiently grief-stricken, that she and her boyfriend were inappropriately touchy-feely during investigations. That these were sold as facts pertinent to the case, not irrelevant observations, shows just how readily tidbits that fit a presupposition are swallowed by the viewer.

Murder suspect Amanda Knox gives insight into what people think they know about her just by looking. PHOTO: NETFLIX
Knox sits in a chair and speaks in an articulate way about what we think we know about her just by looking and why readers were so eager to peer into the soul of the woman the tabloids dubbed "Foxy Knoxy".


Film-makers Brian McGinn and Rod Blackhurst play it right down the middle - an astounding feat of restraint when tabloid freelancer Nick Pisa and Italian prosecutor Guiliano Mignini speak, each revealing far more about their own moral compasses than about the case on which they worked. Their moral codes - and by extension, ours - raise questions regarding standards applied to women's behaviour.