5/10

1989’s “Kickboxer” isn’t hallowed ground, but it does hold a place in the big screen development of star Jean-Claude Van Damme, with the B-movie managing to find some box office hustle, helping the young bruiser climb the Hollywood ladder. Over 25 years later, it’s time for a remake, or reboot in fact, with “Kickboxer: Vengeance” looking to restart the Muay Thai machine for a new generation of genre fans, even bringing Van Damme back into the fold after he passed on a series of dismal sequels. Unfortunately, instead of reviving the original picture’s bright, kick-happy spirit, “Kickboxer: Vengeance” goes dark and dull, showing little interest in becoming the participatory event the first feature pulled off rather well. It’s nice to see Van Damme back in action, but there’s almost nothing memorable about the new take beyond a few fight sequences. 




Watching his karate champion brother Eric (Darren Shahlavi) accept a large sum of money from promoter Marcia (Gina Carano) to participate in underground fighting in Thailand, Kurt (Alain Moussi) grows worried when he doesn’t hear from his sibling. Traveling overseas, Kurt witnesses Eric’s murder at the hands of brutal fighter Tong Po (Dave Bautista), a monster who doesn’t show mercy in the ring. Vowing vengeance, Kurt learns the hard way that Tong Po is not an opponent to be taken lightly, failing to pull off an assassination attempt. Ordered out of the country by local police, Kurt is instead taken by Agent Liu (Sara Malakul Lane) to Eric’s trainer, Durand (Jean-Claude Van Damme). Agreeing to help the young man get into fighting shape, Durand gradually bonds with his student, putting him through intense physical trials to prepare Eric for his showdown with Tong Po. 

“Kickboxer: Vengeance” goes one step beyond predictability. The production isn’t trying to disguise its remake roots, returning to the conflict between Tong Po and Kurt in Thailand, basically hitting the same beats of tragedy and fury as the original picture. Attempting to shake things up is director John Stockwell, who delivers the tale in a non-linear fashion, opening with Kurt’s plan to infiltrate Tong Po’s compound and earn the respect of the students gathered there, enduring a few beatings as an outsider looking to belong. The feature gets up and running in a hurry, meeting Kurt and witnessing Tong Po’s physical and spiritual power, remaining philosophical while mastering fight circuit murders. And yet, the moment the visitor pulls a gun and targets his hulking enemy, the tale quickly rewinds back three months, exploring Eric’s initial monetary temptation, his death, and Kurt’s vow to make those responsible pay. Once the time change hits, it’s nearly impossible to get acclimated to “Kickboxer: Vengeance,” watching Stockwell experiment with wonky editing to a lesser degree throughout the rest of the effort. Instead of originality, the helmer invests in disorientation. 



Stockwell isn’t a talented filmmaker (responsible for “Blue Crush,” “Turistas,” and “Cat Run”), he’s a journeyman-type without a cinematic personality, though “Kickboxer: Vengeance” does provide plenty of chances to break some bad habits. It’s an actioner, with a few extended highlights of mano a mano combat to keep the effort lively, observing Kurt display his martial arts prowess as he bangs around members of Tong Po’s flock, and there’s an engaging street fight where the angry brother breaks out of police custody and does battle with an army of goons, smashing panes of glass and using a nearby elephant to gain the advantage. Tests of strength and training montages also help to pad the run time, watching Durand push Kurt to his breaking point, teaching him the value of pain to help defeat Tong Po. And yes, there’s a joke made about extreme flexibility. It’s all familiar, but it’s reliable at times, especially when the tale focuses exclusively on Durand and Kurt, with Van Damme easily giving the best performance in the movie (granted, the competition isn’t strong), bringing some gravity to the role, even though he’s coasting. Also encouraging is Bautista, who brings acceptable menace to the villainous role. 



After building muscle and speed (well, enough to break coconuts with his bare hands), bedding Liu, and earning Durand’s respect, Kurt is ready for the big time. The entire final act of “Kickboxer: Vengeance” is devoted to the Tong Po showdown, with the script only marginally paying attention to illegal matters with Marcia. Choreography is stiff at times, perhaps too half-speed for comfort, but it connects with gymnastic kicks and powerful punches, preserving the feature’s interest in broad violence. However, little of the film is fun, as Stockwell has replaced cultural interests with industrial ones, making a B-movie that’s grim, even when it covers impossibly silly ground. “Kickboxer: Vengeance” brings back Van Damme, but not the spark of the 1989 picture.