FILM REVIEW
'Hands of Stone'
2 stars (out of 4)

Detail. My kingdom for some detail. "Hands of Stone" purports to be a biography of charismatic boxer Roberto Duran, but is more of a timeline chronicle than a character piece. It covers roughly a dozen years of his life, 1971-1983, when he worked with legendary trainer Ray Arcel, who tamed the slugger's wild streak just enough to make him a world champion.
This is the prime dramatic era of Duran's career - his rags-to-riches ascent, his rivalry with Sugar Ray Leonard, his marriage and subsequent fatherhood. His relationship with Arcel provides narrative bookends and should anchor the story, but if the goal is to examine and explore this coming-together of two great men of the sport, writer/director Jonathan Jakubowitz gets distracted. One of the pitfalls of many biopics is the sacrificing of depth for documentation, a need to acknowledge all the high and low points of their subjects' lives. And the result is a visual encyclopedia entry, albeit one filtered through a medium that renders everything historical fiction anyway. What's the point?
Edgar Ramirez plays Duran with considerable screen presence, plenty to carry the film, and Robert De Niro is strong as the softspoken Arcel, an aging vet lured out of retirement by the great potential of a brash Panamanian with "hands of stone." Arcel's first lesson is to demarcate technique from strategy, short term results from long term goals. It's a wise philosophy, applicable to any number of life situations, not just boxing.


Although this idea is put forth, Jakubowitz never really follows through with its implications. Duran's first fight under Arcel's wing is a visual muddle, the director portraying it as all big punches and no real boxing. Is Duran following his trainer's instructions? It's hard to tell; the execution isn't clear enough to contrast his earlier fighting style with the supposedly new and improved one. Are they forging a friendship, a father-son bond, or just a relationship of mutual respect? Why are they a successful team? Is one yin to the other's yang? Earlier, De Niro's voiceover discusses how a fighter born with talent needs to balance those instincts, those gifts, with "ring sense," an art that must be learned. Is that working for Duran?
Who knows. Jakubowitz sketches but never paints a full portrait. He indulges in numerous half-realized subplots: Political wrangling between Arcel and Duran's manager, Carlos Eleta (Ruben Blades). The love story between Duran and his wife, Felicidad Iglesias (Ana de Armas). Arcel's entanglements with the New York City mob, vague story points he discusses a couple times with wife Stephanie (Ellen Barkin). And flashbacks to Duran's impoverished childhood in Panama, which spurs him to throw lavish parties for his neighborhood friends, and inspires patriotism for his home country.
Duran's battles in and out of the ring with the collected-but-cocky Sugar Ray Leonard (Usher Raymond) suck up screen time, contrasting the brash brawler with the suave dancer. The subtext of their two fights - one being the infamous "no mas" match, in which Duran forfeited his championship smack in the middle of a round - addresses how a boxer can defeat himself by letting the other guy psychologically dictate the confrontation. That's as deep as "Hands of Stone" gets, and it's hardly a revelation, more of a reiteration of many boxing movies before it.
The film ultimately renders Duran with a number of personality features that never really fit together as a whole. Apparently sensing a need to cover a lot of ground, Jakubowitz steps on the gas, and the film is an overedited collection of scenes instead of a fully realized work. He shifts perspectives, makes jarring transitions, moves his camera too much. He's aggressive in technique, but what's his overall strategy? The film is thematically shallow, like a C-minus eighth-grade book report with the margins widened to meet the page-count requirement. "Why?" I can see the teacher scrawling in the margins in red ink. "Why?" It needs detail, which leads to insight, which leads a film away from the pitfalls of the dutiful but emotionally hollow biopic.
