The Wild Life
September 8, 2016by Brian Gibson
Somewhere, Daniel Defoe isn’t so much rolling in his grave as grumbling, moaning, and throwing up his skeletal hands in despair. Robinson Crusoe badly and baldly retold from a talking macaw’s point-of-view, French-Belgian production The Wild Life is chattering, increasingly antic animal-animation.
This Crusoe’s an utter bumbler of an Englishman (voiced by Yuri Lowenthal). Wrecked ashore a rocky isle after a storm, he stumbles—and there’s lots of stumbling, as well as sliding, tripping, slipping, and spinning—upon a motley crew of animals: pangolin Pango, porcupine Epi, kingfisher Kiki, chameleon Carmello (who doesn’t camouflage so much as vanish), billygoat Scrubby (blind until given, yep, spectacles by budding animal-optometrist Crusoe), tapir Rosie, and macaw Mac, whom Crusoe renames Tuesday (David Howard). They’re all hunted, off and on and off and on again, by the best creatures here—two mangy, sly-eyed puss-in-cahoots, Ping and Pong, soon trailing a litter of kitties. And the whole story’s related by Mac, explaining Crusoe’s arrival and harmonious treehouse-making with his new non-human friends to two mice aboard the ship of pirates who have just picked up the castaway.
Mac’s voiceover is insistent and over-explaining. The story’s not really interested in its feathered friend’s desire to see the “new world” out there or welcome humans (though you can understand why, since Crusoe’s so damned dull). No scene stands out; even on the pirate ship, nothing even dodders beyond the ho-hum to reach a rousing level of ho-ho-ho-and-a-bottle-of-rum adventure. Slip-and-slide chase-scene after slip-and-slide chase-scene tumbles along, so it soon seems as though the island’s just an amusement park of cave-rides, bamboo-viaduct slides, and shelter-collapses. And the end-credits sequence is tacked-on hokey uplift, mating off main characters for a loved-ever-after ending. Blech.
As far as animation goes, this only makes one wish wistfully for a different movie. Pirates-wise, me hearties, that would mean cutlassing your losses and watching (or re-watching) The Pirates! Band of Misfits, adapting Gideon Defoe’s series; for a truly enchanting desert-isle tale, wait out those lonesome days and nights until Dutchman Michael Dudok de Wit’s The Red Turtle lands