The Exemplary Badness of “War Dogs” and “Hell or High Water”
By Richard Brody , August 19, 2016

All bad movies are alike; all good movies are good in their own way. O.K., maybe not all bad movies, but there’s an exemplary kind of badness that’s so prevalent in the history of cinema, and that forms such a substantial part of the medium today, that it at least seems like it fits all of them. One major example, “War Dogs,” opens today, and another, “Hell or High Water,” came out last Friday. They don’t have much in common, besides being films that revel in their own plot twists and are realized mainly as pictures of actors acting, delivering skeins of dialogue in settings chosen or made to match the action while conveying some decorative appeal of their own.
Wait, doesn’t this just sound like, well, movies? Yes: the bad or even only mediocre ones, which unfortunately make up a substantial percentage of those in release at a given moment. This kind of filmmaking, though, has lately taken on a particular cachet, infused with creative pride and critical relief in the age of the computer-generated superhero super-spectacle. In the past, this form of mediocrity often offered modest charms and incidental delights. But, in recent years, the mode itself has come packed with vanity, as if the mere fact of flesh-and-blood performers incarnating recognizably human characters in what might be called reality is something to be proud of even before the lights go down. This pomposity, this cinematic chest-beating, usually undercuts the very straightforward simplicity that gave rise to the onscreen boast.
“War Dogs” and “Hell or High Water” have more than badness in common. Though the former is a comedy and the latter has tragic aspects, they’re both caper movies and partner movies, with two men—one who has trouble and another who is trouble—pairing up to pull off a string of crimes that advance from the minor (nearly victimless and mostly bloodless) to the major (reckless and deadly). Along the way, the pairs crack wise, visit pleasure palaces, and enjoy both their well-wrought scheme and their ability to pull it off.
In “War Dogs,” directed by Todd Phillips and based loosely on a true story, it’s the federal government and its client states that are being scammed. Miles Teller plays David Packouz, a twentysomething massage therapist in Miami, in 2008, who’s unhappy with his work. At a funeral, he runs into an old acquaintance from yeshiva, Efraim Diveroli (Jonah Hill), a loud, brash playboy who ropes David into a day on the town and recruits him as an associate in his business. Efraim, an arms dealer who says that he got his start buying and (legally) reselling weapons seized by the police, now trawls lists of available Pentagon arms contracts and picks up small deals that big companies overlook. With his dirty-talking, horse-laughing, sentiment-streaked, won’t-take-no-for-an-answer vehemence—and with bong hits, lines of coke, and a machine gun flaunted in the face of drug dealers—Efraim pulls David along for the ride.
One deal involves getting a shipment of Beretta handguns from Italy to Iraq, where the U.S. Army will turn them over to the new Iraqi police force. But, when an Italian-government embargo blocks the shipment, Efraim and David arrange for delivery to Jordan, planning to have the guns smuggled into Iraq. The ensuing truck trip over the border and through Iraq, undertaken at great risk and leading to an armed battle—dangers played for laughs—gives the pair an inflated sense of possibility. Hubris, mostly Efraim’s, leads them to step up in class, to pursue a bigger deal that requires an even bigger deception, one that’s exacerbated by Efraim’s egotism and dishonesty.
In “Hell or High Water,” directed by David Mackenzie, the stakes are altogether different. Two brothers in West Texas, Tanner Howard (Ben Foster), a convict recently released from prison, and Toby Howard (Chris Pine), an unemployed and divorced father, have a self-imposed mission. Their mother has recently died; she had taken out a reverse mortgage on her ranch, and, unless the men can pay Texas Midlands Bank forty-three thousand dollars by the end of the week, the bank will foreclose on the property. Their response is to rob as many branches of the bank as they can, as quickly and safely as possible. Marcus Hamilton (Jeff Bridges), a local marshal who’s on the verge of retirement, and his partner, Alberto Parker (Gil Birmingham), are called to the first crime scene. Hamilton soon realizes that Texas Midlands is the ongoing target, and the two lawmen stake out the branch that, they calculate, will be hit next, setting up a deadly Western-style confrontation.
Both movies are political, in the broadest sense. “War Dogs” presents the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars as follies of privatization, in which the Bush Administration, seeking to wage them on the cheap (and, along the way, help its corporate cronies), opened the door to the kind of corrupt practices that the movie raucously satirizes. In “Hell or High Water,” the economic devastation of small towns is pinned on banks, which have floated loans and repossessed properties, shuttering businesses, leaving neighborhoods desolate, and pushing residents to desperation. As apt and accurate as these perceptions may be, Phillips and Mackenzie brandish them like banners of virtue and vice, waving them enthusiastically to stoke applause and hissing and to make sure that their own ire and their own sympathies, their derision and their embrace, land on exactly the right squares on the game board.
In “Hell or High Water,” the principal sound is the clicking of the screenwriter Taylor Sheridan’s keyboard, which threatens to override the action and might as well punch the dialogue directly onto the screen in lieu of the actors’ delivery. The one respite from this, of course, is Bridges, whose sly, guttural inflections and silent gestures—down to the tilt of his head beneath the outsized brim of his hat—are more eloquent and expressive, more alive, than anything he’s given to say. (The movie does include one brilliant comedic riff, in a local restaurant, with a venerable waitress dishing out a memorable line to her customers—“What don’t you want?”—that would be a worthy plug-in to more or less any movie featuring an old-timey dive.)
Mackenzie’s portentous stateliness and Phillips’s hectic energy are more or less the same thing—filmmaking as editorializing, with the rueful gloom of despoiled rural life and the go-getting bravado of enabled and encouraged hustlers as two sides of a rapid and superficial diagnosis that’s meant at the same time to be part of the treatment. “War Dogs” has the virtue of its practical details regarding military procurement; “Hell or High Water” has the power of Bridges’s performance (indeed, of his presence). But both movies are as flat and schematic as the scripts behind them; both could be done as table reads with settings green-screened in.
Though “War Dogs,” told from David’s perspective, is adorned with his voice-over, it has no more subjectivity—not the character’s, and not the director’s—than does “Hell or High Water.” Both films feature characters whose personal traits mesh with the action as purely and perfectly as gears in a machine; nothing superfluous to the action is allowed in, except as a conspicuous ornament of humor or local color. The characters have no memories, no identities, no range of interests, no personal connections, no idiosyncrasies beyond the dictates of the plot and the numbingly clear point that the filmmakers use it to make.
These movies and others in their vein—starting with but not limited to such Oscar candidates as “The Big Short” and “Spotlight,” “The Danish Girl” and “45 Years”—suffocate in their makers’ intentions. The intentions don’t just govern the action but seem to clog it like wet cement, bulking up the screen and filling in the space, leaving neither the characters nor the often formidable actors who play them (and Hill is one of the most inventive actors around) any room to maneuver, any margin of freedom, any air of spontaneity, any semblance of existence.
Still, such movies, the result of long thought, careful planning, and precise execution, can be works of genius, whether they are those of Sergei Eisenstein or Alfred Hitchcock, Chantal Akerman or Wes Anderson. The result depends on the originality, the depth, the intellectual insight, the emotional complexity of the ideas behind the plans, the inner motor of the intentions. These are the films that often turn out troubling, controversial, underappreciated. In the more common kind, directors flatter themselves with the goodness of their motives, and critics flatter themselves for endorsing them.