INDIGNATION (15, 110mins) Director: James Schamus Stars: Logan Lerman, Sarah Gadon, Tracy Letts 

Another week, another Philip Roth adaptation. 

Indignation has a much less starry cast than the Ewan McGregor directed American Pastoral (in which McGregor starred with Jennifer Connelly and Dakota Fanning) but it’s the better film, a superbly acted and rather poignant coming-of-age drama set in 1951 which, like American Pastoral, portrays a promising “American” life undone by the fates.

In this case, the protagonist is much more appealing and compelling than McGregor’s hapless businessman and, as played by talented newcomer Logan Lerman, significantly more convincing (there’s something about McGregor playing American that doesn’t sit right).

Lerman plays a studious working class Jewish boy, Marcus Messner, son of a butcher, who moves to a college in Ohio on a scholarship, thus evading the Korean War draft, unlike some ill-fated local lads.

Still, that doesn’t stop his overly anxious father (Danny Burstein) from trying to control his destiny from afar, attempting to influence the company he keeps. Marcus only has eyes for one person and you can’t blame him: striking but unstable blonde classmate Olivia Hutton (Sarah Gadon) who astonishes him by performing an intimate sex act on their first date.

The world of the inexperienced, intense youngster pretty much spins on its axis and from henceforth he finds himself increasingly isolated in the conservative, conformist community presided over by a domineering Dean (a superb Tracy Letts), while trying to make sense of his feelings.

Like American Pastoral, which was McGregor’s first film as director, Indignation marks a directorial debut; this time for James Schamus, a longtime collaborator of director Ang Lee (he wrote The Ice Storm and Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon). Here he indulges himself as the writer too much – several scenes go on far too long – and the story does feel rather slight and over-familiar; another tale of adolescent non-conformity. However, the performances are so good, especially by Lerman and Canadian actress Gadon, that you remain absorbed.

With its enclosed college setting and dialogue-heavy screenplay, the result is rather like watching a stage play.

VERDICT: 3/5