'Life on the Line' is a melodramatic brownout: movie review
BY Dan Gunderman
NEW YORK DAILY NEWS Thursday, November 17, 2016, 11:11 AM

With John Travolta, Kate Bosworth. An uncle raising his orphaned niece attempts to steer her in the right direction while also keeping his county’s lights on. Director: David Hackl. (1:37). R: Violence/grisly images and brief strong language. Limited theaters and on demand Nov. 18.
Director David Hackl’s “Life on the Line” is supposed to be a moving story about men working electrical lines. Viewers, however, might require a high-voltage shock just to endure it.
The action/drama film, which premiered at the Napa Valley Film Festival a year ago, has an impressive cast headlined by John Travolta, Kate Bosworth and Sharon Stone.


But the script, written by Primo Brown, Marvin Peart and Peter I. Horton, is a complete and utter melodramatic bore.

Shockingly predictable and formulaic, perhaps the only saving grace is Jeff Toyne’s appropriate music.
‘The Forger’ review: Travolta's art caper is no masterpiece
It starts off promising, at least conceptually, but resorts to well-trodden conventions of the genre and overly effusive scenes, with a rape premise horribly woven in.


While Travolta and Bosworth, playing the lead characters of Beau and Bailey, respectively, deliver admirable performances, the story they’re working under is just not up to snuff.
The production values are mediocre and the story surprisingly veers away from a lineman’s day-to-day routine, but director Hackl and the writing team did at least conceive a versatile character in Beau, though he too gets pulled into the melodrama on occasion.
“Life on the Line” is a film that probably won’t hold your attention throughout its 97-minute running time, but it is, at the very least, a well-intentioned tribute to the workers who often sacrifice themselves to make sure lights stay on.
Leah Remini talks tension with Kirstie Alley on ‘Stern’
In Hackl’s film, Travolta plays a distraught uncle, Beau, who loses his brother to “the line.” Once a free spirit, Beau grounds himself and raises his orphaned niece, Bailey (Bosworth), who grows to love him but yearns to leave the small town.


Beau keeps his utility crew in line, including Duncan (Devon Sawa), someone he sees as ignoble and too rotten for his niece. But when a deadly storms hits their Texas town, Beau and Duncan must work together to keep the area illuminated. The plot thickens when, during this storm, Bailey tries to intervene in her neighbors’ marital dispute.
The poorly written and gratuitous scene is hugely out of place.
This movie simply short circuits, with undeniably forced and stale romantic subplots and an ending that is broadcast about a half-hour too soon.
