The Tribeca Film Festival typically offers a range of genres. This year, the horror movies presented their own kind of range. On one end, we have Vincent Masciale’s Fear, Inc., drawing from the so-called postmodern model of horror movies that reference themselves. You might recall the moment this model became particularly visible, in 1996, when Kevin Williamson conceived a slasher movie premised on the idea that fans of the genre came in knowing all the rules and tropes. At once mocking and adhering to those rules, Scream, ironically enough, soon swelled into its own four-film franchise while seeming to set these very same conventions in stone. 
Fortunately, the slasher film survives, sometimes repetitive and other times clever, simultaneously unoriginal and deconstructed. Unfortunately, is not clever or original. Fear, Inc., which premiered at Tribeca on 15 April, stars Lucas Neff as Joe, a laid-back, hirsute slacker who, in the tradition of TV sitcoms, has somehow managed to attach himself with a stunning fiancée, Lindsey (Caitlin Stasey), whose rich parents provide the couple with a fabulous house up in the Hollywood Hills. Joe has nearly everything he could want, but longs to have his complacency jolted by something exciting. And so he calls the number on a mysterious card he receives from a stranger, setting in motion a home invasion scenario that may or may not be part of an elaborate fabrication that evokes many of the classic horror films Joe and his best friend, Ben (Chris Marquette), are constantly referencing. 
Masciale’s film cops a great deal of its plot and approach from The Game, in which Michael Douglas and the audience shared in misconceptions and guesses about what might be “real”. Of course, this allusion isn’t lost on Joe, who compares his experience to David Fincher’s film repeatedly, to the point that his own film is undermined. Joe spends the first two thirds of Fear, Inc., laughing at everyone and congratulating the ghoulish home invaders for making everything seem so “real”. When he finally starts believing what’s happening—shortly after being forced to enact a Saw-inspired hacksaw job on Ben’s wrist—the proceedings still lack conviction. Shortly thereafter, you understand why. By my count, the film manages at least five ties to wrench the audience from one false sense of certainty to another, but by number three, you just don’t care anymore. In this case, familiarity just breeds tedium. 
Fear, Inc. 
Rating: 