Fear, Inc. Review  


Rating: 4/10

“Fear, Inc.” began life as a short film, and it’s easy to tell such narrative limitation while watching its feature-length expansion. Screenwriter Luke Barnett has a wonderful idea to help twist the horror genre, crafting a tale where terror and murder are requested by individuals searching for a fresh kick in their dreary lives. It’s like “Saw” in a way, only the victims demand the utmost in intimidation. However, stretching the plot to 90 minutes proves too difficult for Barnett, who tries to massage the material by introducing a self-referential approach, making “Fear, Inc.” a “Scream” knockoff, and an easily fatigued one at that. Big frights and laughs are in short supply here, keeping the viewing experience strangely deflated, especially when the central concept of doomsday participation is primed for a robust exploration.




Joe (Lucas Neff) is a slacker, living an unemployed life in the lap of luxury, with affluent girlfriend Lindsay (Caitlin Stasey) paying the bills. Engaging in daily mischief, Joe isn’t challenged by life, but he loves being scared. At a haunted house complaining about a lack of real frights, Joe is approached by a stranger offering an invitation to hire Fear, Inc., a company that stalks clients to give them an authentic rush of terror. Joe decides to sample the goods, pulled into the organization’s weird way of conducting business. Back at home, Joe welcomes his best friend Ben (Chris Marquette) and wife Ashleigh (Stephanie Drake) for a brief stay, with partying ways filling their minds with drugs and games, sharing their love of horror movies. However, the festivities are interrupted by the Fear, Inc. crew, who begin an evening of murder and mayhem, with Joe the prime target.

“Fear, Inc.” remains true to its genre worship, opening with a prologue involving a young professional (Abigail Breslin) stuck in a parking garage, chased by company operatives in the darkness as she frantically tries to get in touch with customer service, canceling her order. It’s a routine encounter, playing with lighting and scares, but it does introduce the idea of Fear, Inc. superbly, showcasing the company’s commitment to the inspiration of panic and its wide reach when it comes to leaving clients with no escape. Sadly, it’s the last offering of genre inspiration the production arranges, soon focusing on Joe’s bachelor-esque life in a ritzy Los Angeles suburb, where his infatuation with shock value and commitment to drugs and drink have left him numb to the world, in need of a pulse-quickening awakening.



Before “Fear, Inc.” unleashes violence, it takes more time than it needs building characterization, spending the entire first act establishing playful behavior between Joe and Ben, who not only share a love of cinema, but a history of friendship that’s rescued Joe from dark times. They’re practically brothers, and director Vincent Masciale overindulges when it comes to camaraderie, spending valuable screen time on repetitive interactions, eventually getting around to the moment where Joe decides to call Fear, Inc. and place an order. Barnett isn’t exactly crafting a profound drama here, making such early padding curious, delaying the inevitable for so long it erodes anticipation, rendering the eventual home invasion anticlimactic, especially when it largely consists of masked brutes entering the property, forcing the foursome into survival stances.



There’s more to “Fear, Inc.” than meets the eye, with a minefield of spoilers preventing extensive analysis. It’s safe to say Joe receives the experience he’s looking for, even delighting in the intensity at first, but his knowledge of horror cinema is weaponized, soon referencing rules within the genre to help navigate oncoming attacks. If it sounds like “Scream,” that’s because it is. Barnett isn’t shy about pilfering ideas in the name of homage, which feels like the wrong path to take with this inventive concept. Before the movie stumbles through absurd turns of plot, it plays too jokey, with loud performers screaming iffy dialogue. Self-awareness isn’t a friend to “Fear, Inc.” It’s far more effective as a sly offering of ghoulish encounters, packing in all the gore and dread it can handle. Masciale and Barnett treat it as more of a goof, watering down scares and blowing a perfectly fertile premise about a potentially eventful, twisted Halloween night.
