Review: In ‘Hillary’s America,’ Dinesh D’Souza Warns of a Plan to ‘Steal’ the Country
Hillary’s America Directed by Dinesh D'Souza, Bruce Schooley Documentary PG-13 1h 40m
By GLENN KENNYJULY 21, 2016

The new movie by the conservative author and pundit Dinesh D’Souza, “Hillary’s America,” directed and written with Bruce Schooley, opens with an animated montage of a map of the United States going up in flames in various spots. A close-up image of Hillary Clinton caps the scene. The film then recounts Mr. D’Souza’s own guilty plea to violating federal campaign finance laws. He was set up, he insists. “If you make a film criticizing the most powerful man in the world,” he says, referring to his 2012 documentary, “2016: Obama’s America,” “expect the empire to strike back.”
“What if the goal of the Democratic Party is to steal the most valuable thing the world has ever produced?” Mr. D’Souza muses from a halfway house where he’s staying as part of the plea deal. In this scene, a dramatic re-enactment, he watches Ms. Clinton announce her campaign for president. “What if their plan is to steal — America?” On these words, Mr. D’Souza’s eyes shift from the ceiling-mounted TV display to stare straight into the camera. It’s very Dramatic Chipmunk.



Once the hero’s journey theme is established, it’s on to about an hour’s worth of “the Democratic Party was the party of slavery” material. This content, and more (including a young actress playing Ms. Clinton as a practically lunatic student radical), will be familiar to anyone who’s examined a right-wing website.
When Mr. D’Souza describes the effects of Andrew Jackson’s Indian Removal Act, he intones, “It was a trail of tears,” as if he has just come up with the phrase. This is typical of his method. According to a certain interpretation of the auteur theory, a film’s value derives from the extent to which it communicates the personality and character of its director. Judged by that standard alone, I suppose “Hillary’s America” is some kind of masterpiece.
