
The woolly mammoth couple Manny and Ellie contend with possible empty-nest syndrome and a possibly nest-destroying asteroid in “Ice Age: Collision Course,” the 37th installment in the popular computer animation franchise. O.K., actually it’s only the fifth feature, but what with the shorts and TV specials and video games, it feels as if there have been so, so many more.
The key attributes of the movie, which is directed by Galen T. Chu and Mike Thurmeier, are undemanding and audience-approved. Anthropomorphized prehistoric cartoon animals spout endless contemporary-culture-allusive wisecracks (“You look nothing like your profile picture,” “Hashtag hashtag hashtag,” etc., and ad infinitum), alternating with Hollywood-standard family-values twaddle that is as facile as it is insincerely expressed. Hence, the movie’s actual entertainment value rises considerably during the dialogue-free sequences, most of which involve a manic squirrel, Scrat, chasing his coveted acorn into a spaceship initially encased in a glacier. He inadvertently launches the spacecraft, and flies around in a way that reorders the known universe.


“Road Runner”-style gags recycled in computer-smooth 3-D animation still pack some punch, as it happens. A scene in which an electrical storm menaces the movie’s protagonists also generates some visual interest.
The wide-ranging celebrity cast of voice talent here makes room for the astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson as a version of himself, and Adam Devine as Manny and Ellie’s would-be son-in-law, Julian, who repeatedly refers to Manny as “Bro Dad,” a habit that is precisely as unendearing as it sounds. Eagle-eyed parents can rest easy; the role of Peaches, the object of Julian’s affections, is voiced by Keke Palmer, not the eponymous raunchy performing artist. I consider this a missed opportunity. GLENN KENNY
“Ice Age: Collision Course” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for anthropomorphized prehistoric cartoon animal body-function humor, mostly. 