William C. Sullivan’s Jane Wants a Boyfriend is a rom-com with a decided difference: Its young titular heroine (Louisa Krause) has autism. She lives with her parents in Queens, New York, and works as an assistant costume designer for a theatre company, a job which her actress/bartender sister Bianca (Eliza Dushku) has procured for her. Bianca is indeed caring, too much so, for her overzealous attempts to shield Jane from a perhaps harmful adult world prove increasingly stifling to her growingly independent (and horny) sibling.
It should be said that Bianca’s lovingly protective nature has its lapses, especially when her mother (Polly Draper) tells her that she and Dad are moving to New Jersey, necessitating Jane’s moving in with Bianca and her boyfriend Rob (Amir Arison). Things spin further out of whack for control freak Bianca when one of her regular barflies, Jack (Gabriel Ebert), a romantic loser sick of games-playing New York ladies, becomes intrigued with Jane, about whom he doesn’t know the truth.
With consultation by public speaker Kerry Magro, who has autism himself, this is a refreshingly candid portrait of someone with the condition, helped immeasurably by Krause’s fearlessly committed performance. Although it would have been salutary to have an actually autistic actor in the role, Krause is quite convincing with her intensity, furrowed brow and sudden, violent outbreaks of defiance. She manages to make Jane’s story compelling, and you empathetically root for her all the way as she revels in the old movies which provide her main idea of grownup love. (It also should be said that her acting is more than strong enough to make quite unnecessary Sullivan’s often intrusive use of showy sound and camera tricks to convey her confused condition at times.)
Unfortunately, there’s also Bianca’s tale to be told, and here the film, so compelling when interested in Jane, falls into an off-putting stewpot of urban clichés. The character’s basic insensitivity and self-involvement are obstacles, which the more conventionally pretty but very abrasive Dushku cannot overcome to make her anything but a quite superior pain in the ass. (She’s trying to quit smoking, and her incessant need to sneak off for a cig is a running joke that goes stale quickly.) Bianca is acting inA Midsummer Night’s Dream, necessitating a plethora of rehearsal scenes in which Shakespeare’s lines merely point up the banality of much of the dialogue here. Rob, especially as played by Arison, is even more obnoxious, referring to Jane at one point as a “retard.” I also wish Ebert had been a more charismatic partner for the troubled leading lady, although it’s not his fault that screenwriter Jarret Kerr has given him a pity-party monologue in which, reacting to Bianca’s encouraging words as she pours him a sympathetic drink, he regretfully admits to merely being an assistant chef at a restaurant that only got a few stars on Yelp. 
