A WONDROUS REMAKE OF “PETE’S DRAGON”
By Richard Brody , AUGUST 11, 2016

If the name of the director of “Pete’s Dragon” were kept under wraps, the artistry displayed throughout the film would be a surprise. The director is David Lowery, whose 2013 feature “Ain’t Them Bodies Saints,” a sort of modern and modernist updating of Western tropes, is a powerfully intimate drama with a vast lyrical resonance. When that film came out, I wrote enthusiastically about Lowery’s art, but I wouldn’t have thought it a natural fit for the requirements of “Pete’s Dragon,” Disney’s special-effect-centric remake of its 1977 live-action-plus-animation fantasy. Fortunately, the folks at Disney did, and they were right, for reasons that I could have intuited from the virtues of “Ain’t Them Bodies Saints.” In that melodrama, Lowery seems to express his own feelings of wonder in the presence of mighty forces beyond those of his characters themselves, and he realizes those mighty forces with an intensely sensuous, firsthand, experiential immediacy—and that’s exactly what he brings to “Pete’s Dragon.”

The original version of the movie is set early in the twentieth century. It is wacky in tone, and is a musical. Lowery’s remake is set in the present day. It is a drama punctuated by comic moments, has no singing or dancing, and exchanges the conspicuous artifice of a hand-drawn animated dragon for a dragon that, despite being a C.G.I. creation, conjures an awe-inspiring physicality. It’s as if Disney were inaugurating a new artisanal or organic line—one that “Pete’s Dragon” inaugurates gloriously, with heart and style. As realized by Lowery, it is filled with quiet joy and simple wonder. The movie is a fantasy about the friendship, in the wild, of a boy and a dragon—and the duo’s unexpected confrontation with ordinary human company—and Lowery anchors that fantasy in practical and inconvenient details, which tether the magical realm to the material one. In a stealthily audacious way, Lowery has made a sort of neorealist fantasy, in which potentially nonsensical whimsy turns out to make a lot of sense.

Young Pete (Levi Alexander) is about five years old. He’s on a car trip with his parents on a remote highway somewhere in the Pacific Northwest, sitting in the back seat and reading his favorite book, “Elliot Gets Lost,” about a dog. Suddenly, a deer bounds across the road, the car spins out of control and tumbles down a hill, and Pete’s parents are killed instantly. Pete is unharmed but alone in the woods; on the verge of being attacked by a pack of wolves, he’s rescued by the appearance of the titular dragon, which scares them off. He is a natural-looking, furry creature that’s like a big, green-tinted, winged, and long-necked dog, whom, of course, Pete names Elliot.

Five years later, Pete (played for the rest of the film by Oakes Fegley) is Elliot’s feral ward. With the dragon’s help, Pete has built a sort of rustic shanty deep in the woods and utterly out of human contact. Elliot is, in effect, raising Pete; the dragon is a friendly one, whose fire-breathing is more a matter of myth than of reality. He’s more smoke than fire, more a backed-up exhaust pipe than a flamethrower—he’s a creature that looks potentially apocalyptic but lacks the nuclear option. Elliot does have a couple of notably powerful tricks in reserve, though.

First, Elliot flies, using majestic bat-like wings to soar above the trees and through a valley, which lends a piquant thrill to the frolics of boy and dragon through the wild—Pete cannonballs off the edge of a cliff the way other kids jump into a swimming pool, and Elliot swoops down, faster than the speed of free fall, to catch him on his broad and plush back. Second, Elliot evanesces—at the approach of humans, whose prying eyes he senses as a threat, he fades out, as if in a mist of vapor, into invisibility.

That invisibility lends the story its mythic dimension. In the town nearest to the woods, a crusty, kindly old-timer, Mr. Meacham (Robert Redford), entertains children by telling them tales of the dragon he saw in the woods, many decades earlier, as a child. Mr. Meacham, a renowned outdoorsman, wears the virtual badge of The Only Person Who’s Seen the Dragon, and no one takes his tales very seriously—not even his daughter, Grace (Bryce Dallas Howard), a forest ranger who has explored the woods thoroughly and caught no trace of the beast, and not even the ten-year-old Natalie (Oona Laurence), the daughter of Grace’s fiancé, Jack (Wes Bentley), a partner in the area’s main business, a logging concern.

When Grace gets a glimpse of Pete in the woods (Elliot, of course, having evanesced at her approach) and manages to bring him to the local hospital for care—he is, after all, a child in the wild with no apparent means of survival—Elliot eventually shows up, and the chase begins. Jack’s business partner is his brother, Gavin (Karl Urban), whose practices are more cavalier—he orders the crew to cut down sections of the forest that Jack had resolved to preserve—and Gavin’s approach to the dragon is no different. He resolves to catch the dragon and turn him into a lucrative sideshow-type attraction. Meanwhile, Pete develops an attachment to Natalie, Grace, and Jack, and is torn between his loyalty to the dragon and his newly stirred reminiscence of family belonging.

What’s astonishing about “Pete’s Dragon” is its moment-to-moment flow, the nuances of its moods and the particulars of its images and sounds. It’s not about anything (or much), it simply is, and that is-ness is among the rarest qualities in a studio movie—let alone one with an utterly implausible premise. At a time when studios mainly make high-budget political allegories that both tap into a natural audience and propel movies off the arts pages and onto the front pages, “Pete’s Dragon” makes a greater and rarer claim on attention—the emotional and spiritual power of sheer and mere seeing. Elliot himself is a cinematic marvel, whose textured physicality and warm, weighty presence are a masterwork of production design and taste. He’s a dragon with great but limited powers—a vulnerable dragon whose very vulnerability gives the drama a kick. (His capture has the pathos as well as the iconography of the binding of Gulliver by the Lilliputians in Dave Fleischer’s 1939 animated feature. Lowery doesn’t burden the film with a wide range of cinematic references, but the other conspicuous one is the evocation of François Truffaut’s 1970 historical drama “The Wild Child.”)

“Pete’s Dragon” conjures the primordial power of fantasy itself. The movie isn’t at all about what the existence of a dragon would mean but about what it would be like to see a dragon—and, for that matter, to see it up close, to live with it. Even more, it respects the boundaries and rules of the fantastic element that are themselves the essence of art, even a measure of art: What would or could it feel like for us merely to live in a world in which, in fact, a dragon exists? Even to pose the question, the movie throws the question back upon itself—it’s the record of an imaginary experience, a cinematic thought experiment in which the first subject isn’t young Pete but Lowery himself. He has made a film in which he tries to imagine a world, one that maps with an intimate simplicity onto a recognizable and not overly confectionary one, in which Elliot turns up. It’s less the telling of a story than the record of an inner experience extruded into the form of images visible to all.