Straight outta middle school and playing heavy metal gigs
By Walter Addiego Updated 12:51 pm, Thursday, July 21, 2016 



Talk about a rapid rise to fame. Three very young Brooklyn musicians, performing on the streets of New York as Unlocking the Truth, found a national audience with a YouTube video shot by a passerby, which led to appearances on big-time TV shows and, in 2014, a $1.8 million contract with Sony Music. 
Now comes a feature-length documentary, “Breaking a Monster.” Not too shabby for a trio of middle school students. 
Some interest in the band can surely be attributed to novelty value. In addition to their age, the African American boys — Malcolm Brickhouse, Jarad Dawkins and Alec Atkins — are performing heavy metal music, an overwhelmingly white cultural phenomenon.
But there’s also an undeniable measure of talent, which has landed the boys gigs at festivals like the Coachella Valley Music & Arts Festival (they are the youngest group ever to play there) and opportunities to back up the likes of Motörhead, Living Colour and Marilyn Manson. Unlocking the Truth eventually opened for Metallica.
In some ways, “Breaking a Monster” director Luke Meyer had it too easy. How can you miss when showing how these 12- and 13-year-olds hooked up with white-haired showbiz veteran Alan Sacks (co-creator of TV’s “Welcome Back Kotter,” in addition to many music-industry credits)? 
Or when the boys coolly play games on their phones as they wait in Sony’s plush offices for a visit from executives who will put on the full-court press? Particularly after we’ve observed the youngsters in their decidedly non-opulent Brooklyn homes. 
The film is modestly interesting as a portrayal of today’s music business, and more so in showing the inevitable dash of cold water as the boys are required to focus on travel schedules, musical coaching sessions and the not-always-welcome side effects of quick fame. Other bumps in the road include issues with the Sony contract and their relationship with Sacks. 
“Breaking a Monster” is engaging to watch partly because of the three young stars’ personalities — despite a few adolescent squabbles, they remain likable sorts. And while it doesn’t shy away from the subject, the movie also declines to press too hard on the message that there are distinct downsides to the entertainment racket (as the singer said, it’s just a job, you know?) and that second thoughts may be unavoidable.
These lessons are a burden on veterans of the business, and of course there’s no telling what’s in store for Unlocking the Truth. But Malcolm, Jarad and Alec have a level of vitality that, if it doesn’t guarantee they’ll endure, at least gives them a solid chance. 