Review: In ‘Blood Father,’ Mel Gibson Plays With Pulp Fiction
Blood Father Directed by Jean-François Richet Action, Thriller R 1h 28m 
By MANOHLA DARGISAUG. 25, 2016 

Hobbesian to the max, “Blood Father” is unwaveringly nasty and brutish. It’s also short, a combination that pretty much gives you all that you could want from a pulp fiction in which Mel Gibson plays a grizzled loner inking skin in a spot called the Missing Link Tattoo. He’s Link, of course; first name John. A former bad, bad man with a wild beard and a deep well of cynicism, John lives in a trailer parked on one of those picturesquely godforsaken southwestern landscapes where John Ford-style homesteaders once circled the wagons. The dream of the Old West dies hard, especially in the movies.

Directed by Jean-François Richet, “Blood Father” is based on a novel of the same title by Peter Craig, who shares script credit with Andrea Berloff. The movie is basically one of those rescue missions in which two people end up saving each other, in this case John and his long-missing daughter, Lydia (Erin Moriarty). She reappears in his life after having made a splashy, gory entrance with some heavily armed gangbangers and an excitable number in a suit, Jonah (Diego Luna). Things go south, as they must, and she high-tails it back to Dad. It’s a tense reunion — John is sober, she snorts powder — if flecked with comedy. Their laughs take a timeout when the gangbangers show, guns blazing.
Mr. Richet directed the 2005 remake of John Carpenter’s exploitation thriller “Assault on Precinct 13,” which in turn was modeled on Howard Hawks’s “Rio Bravo.” Mr. Richet clearly loves this hard-boiled material as much as he does old films. “Blood Father” is a tight, blunt 88 minutes of hard talk, fired bullets and spit-shined genre conventions. In short order it flips into a road movie when John and Lydia are forced to flee, a narrative turn that allows Mr. Richet to root around in a sandbox filled with the usual classic playthings: cool rides, ribbons of lost highway, the motel that becomes a deathtrap, the spooky deserts haunted by the ghosts of film cowboys and Indians past.

Mr. Gibson makes a persuasive derelict John Wayne with a loose, energetic performance, finely tuned comic timing and an amused, self-aware “Lethal Weapon” glint. As the guns come out, that glint grows harder and Mr. Gibson’s body almost seems to as well, as if he were developing muscle as needed. It’s such a strong performance that in moments, despite Mr. Richet’s attention to detail — the shiny chrome, the desperados, the pretty sun-kissed color — the movie all but fades, leaving only Mr. Gibson. Ms. Moriarty works well as the little lost girl who may not want to be found, and there’s nice support from William H. Macy, but “Blood Father” is Mr. Gibson’s show.