Wonderfully animated myth 'Kubo and the Two Strings' channels Miyazaki classics (B)

 Aug. 18, 2016 5:28pm


Growing up, I often found stop-motion animation unsettling. Maybe it's because the first movie I remember seeing in that style was The Nightmare Before Christmas, which threatened to forever paint my view of the genre as creepy.
But Kubo and the Two Strings is unsettling only when it wants to be. More often than not it's a charming, Eastern-influenced myth that's beautiful to watch and enjoyable to follow.
Kubo (voiced by Art Parkinson) is a young boy with one eye who lives in a coastal village with his mother, who seems to be ill and suffering from some sort of memory loss. Kubo spends much of his time in the village telling stories, but he doesn't just sit around a campfire with his audience. He brings his tales to life with music and magic, animating origami characters that are almost as awesome to watch on-screen as they would be in person.

But as with most fantasy myths, the peace cannot last. Two masked villains (both voiced by Rooney Mara, and both capable of scaring small children) arrive in town hoping to steal Kubo's remaining eye, forcing the boy to flee. On his adventure to find a set of magical armor, he encounters a talking monkey (Charlize Theron), a giant beetle that is also a samurai (Matthew McConaughey) and no shortage of danger.
There's a criticism to be made of some of the casting decisions. Despite being clearly set in ancient Japan and featuring several Asian actors in its more minor roles, the star voices are noticeably white. They do their jobs well enough, but McConaughey can hide his Texas drawl only so much, and it can feel out of place for a world that doesn't look very Western.
It's a story that relies on a few stereotypes, but it feels surprisingly original, due in no small part to Kubo's magic being a weapon of choice as opposed to a traditional sword (though he definitely wields one of those, too). It's a fairy tale that wouldn't feel out of place on the filmography of Hayao Miyazaki, and its beautiful visuals go beyond anything you've probably seen in a stop-motion film before.
KUBO AND THE TWO STRINGS (B)
Directed by Travis Knight.
