Eat That Question
??? out of four stars


Rock and jazz rebel Frank Zappa was never easily pigeonholed. From my point of view, the prolific composer, dazzling guitarist and flamboyant leader of the Mothers of Invention was fascinating: an intellectually exciting iconoclast, and a creative giant among pygmies. Other people disdained him and many more never heard of him, despite his significant cultural impact internationally.
Thorson Schutte's valuable posthumous documentary offers samples of Zappa's provocative music, which is widely available online, and almost two hours of media interview footage featuring his libertarian political, social and cultural observations. That stiletto-sharp social sarcasm is harder to find, but every bit as exciting as his unflaggingly inventive melodies and foul-mouthed, slap-your-face lyrics.
Zappa was in favor of offending everybody and oppressing no one. Personal freedom and free speech were his central concerns, defended with misanthropic humor. As he tells one talk show hostess, Dirty words don't exist. This is a fantasy that is manufactured by religious fanatics and government organizations to keep people stupid. And although he considered interviews one of the most abnormal things you can do to people, two steps from the inquisition, he found it a potentially useful method to broadcast his message. He was a scathing critic of what he considered a corporate state creating Pavlovian cravings for sex, sports, junk food and junk culture. Aesthetic enrichment? This is not a major concern in the United States. He is debated here by broadcasters who call him a drug-addled freak; he grumbles that he has consumed nine joints in his lifetime.
We also see how his avant-garde musical sophistication and staunch anti-communism made Zappa a personal hero for Czech President Voclav Havel. The film follows him with clear affection from his youthful TV debut, squeezing bizarre refrains from a bicycle, through the approach of his 1993 passing from prostate cancer at age 53. It's a good reminder, or introduction, for a multi-talent like no other.
