Review: A Couple’s Adoration After 76 Years of Marriage in ‘My Love, Don’t Cross That River’
MY LOVE, DON’T CROSS THAT RIVER  NYT Critics’ Pick  Directed by Mo-young Jin  
By ANDY WEBSTERJUNE 16, 2016


Jo Byong-man and Kang Gye-yeul in “My Love, Don’t Cross That River,” a documentary about a couple’s extraordinary bond. Credit Film Movement
There is visual poetry in Jin Mo-young’s documentary, “My Love, Don’t Cross That River,” and unblinking observation as well. The film covers 15 months with Jo Byong-man and Kang Gye-yeul, married for 76 years and living in a modest, rural riverside home in Gangwon Province in South Korea.


He is nearly 100, losing his hearing and plagued with labored breathing that is unnerving to behold. She is almost 90 and blessed with an unwavering spirit. Their bond is profound, strengthened by shared household responsibilities — cooking, collecting firewood, tending their dogs — and a sense of affectionate play. They often dress in identical colors and toss leaves and snow at each other like youngsters. As they retire side by side, he gently caresses her face.

Of their history, we hear only that they met when she was 14; Mr. Jo worked in her parents’ shop. (Early marriage was common at the time.) Three years after they wed, they became intimate, at Ms. Kang’s initiative. (She is still grateful for his restraint.) Of their 12 children, six died of measles. Their surviving children visit, with grandkids, and bicker, as family members often do.

Over seasons captured in Mr. Jin’s lyrical camerawork, we witness Mr. Jo’s decline and foreshadowed demise. In an old custom, Ms. Kang burns her husband’s clothes so they may serve him in the afterlife and mourns in a wintry landscape. Many of the passages in this gentle film may be universal, but the love here is extraordinary.

My Love, Don’t Cross That River  NYT Critics’ Pick
Director Mo-young Jin Writer Mo-young Jin Stars Byeong-man Jo, Kang Gye-Yeol Running Time 1h 26m Genres Documentary, Drama, Romance
Movie data powered by IMDb.com
Last updated: Jul 1, 2016

