
Most conscientious objectors refuse to serve. Desmond Doss refused not to. A World War II Army medic who declined to carry a weapon into battle on Okinawa, he saved some 75 men, a stirring tale told in straight-on 1950s style, albeit with gruesome 21st-century visual effects, in “Hacksaw Ridge.”
A devout Catholic with an almost erotic fixation on violence, Mel Gibson was the perfect choice to direct this update on “Sergeant York,” in which Desmond, a gangly young hillbilly beautifully played by Andrew Garfield, grows up in a landscape steeped in bloodshed. His brutal father (Hugo Weaving) allows Desmond and his brother to viciously beat each other to save the old man the chore of beating both himself.
These early scenes promise a meditative equivocation to rival “American Sniper,” and if the film’s director were anyone but Gibson, a fixture on or even atop Hollywood’s enemies list, it would be expecting several Oscar nominations.
Yet “Hacksaw” does occasionally lurch into cliché, particularly in the boot-camp hazing scenes in which the cottony-soft Vince Vaughn proves a semi-laughable choice to play the iron-bottomed drill sergeant, while Australia’s Sam Worthington gator-wrestles his American accent as the company captain.
Both men try to drum Doss, a Seventh-day Adventist, out of the Army when they discover he refuses to even touch weapons. In a flashback, we learn that the last time he came in contact with a firearm was when he nearly shot his own father in a forever war of the domestic kind. Doss is heading home to marry his girl (a sweet Teresa Palmer) when the brass instead order him arrested for failing to follow orders.
This middling midsection takes far too long but does provide an extra layer of meaning to events on Okinawa, where Doss and his fellow damned mount a steep cliff in the teeth of fanatical Japanese resistance. The “Nips” are sheltered by concrete pillboxes and underground bunkers so deep, even naval bombardment can’t dislodge them.
Gibson stages these battle scenes with a nauseating effectiveness — an R rating for this gore seems unforgivable — that makes for some of the year’s most gripping cinematic images. But Gibson also can’t quite resist making his inferno look thrilling. There’s an attraction to violence here, a sadistic fascination that I think even Gibson doesn’t quite grasp: He’s a man whose life turned on avoidance of war (his father moved the Gibsons from New York to Australia to keep his boys from being called to serve in Vietnam), and there are equal parts relief and regret in him. In publicity notes, Garfield says of Gibson (who does not act in the film), “He’s got this real innocence and purity to him.” Well, no, not at all, but Gibson’s turmoil is an internal war almost as riveting as the external one he stages.
“If this hill doesn’t kill us, it will surely break our hearts” was a Marine’s comment before a battle (unseen by us) in Clint Eastwood’s 1986 film “Heartbreak Ridge.” A touch of that subtlety would have been welcome on Hacksaw Ridge, which is stormed by steely-eyed actors saying things like “Let’s go to work” as they manfully run to glory. War was both cruel and magnificent, as Churchill once put it. To Gibson, it still is.
