
It is nice to see beloved films get some more attention after many years, in order to bring in a new audience, but why can't films just be re-released in theatres as a celebration? Why do we have to receive unnecessary sequels to great films that will clearly pail in comparison? Bad Santa 2 is just another example of why some films should stay sequel-free. Don't get me wrong, I definitely enjoyed certain aspects of this film and it may please some fans of the original, but in the end, it is just as unnecessary as films like Anchorman 2 or Horrible Bosses 2. Both of those films had their share of clever moments, but ultimately fall short of their predecessors in terms of quality. Here is why Bad Santa 2 was too little too late.

Having a 13 year gap to fill is a hard feat, I will give them that, but Bad Santa 2 borrows far too much humour from its predecessor, seeming too afraid of being original enough to bring in a fresh audience. If more films could make sequels that have fresh stories in order to draw in a new audience, that would be great, but this formula seems to be overdone nowadays. Finding the same core characters doing the same thing they did in the first film already feels stale, but Willie has given up wanting to be Santa, Marcus doesn't even seem to be interested in this particular storyline, and Thurman just seems to have gotten dumber as time went on. There are some clever jokes here and there, but most of the film rehashes things viewers found funny the first time around, which comes off as lazy.

In a film filled with many cliches and tropes rehashing the original film, it is a breath of fresh air every time the character of Thurman Merman is on screen. Sure, in this film they make him much dumber than he ever was, which felt annoying at times, but his characters arc in this film actually brought a tear to my eye. Brett Kelly's chemistry with Billy Bob Thornton is something to savour throughout this film, as they are the only thing that brings any holiday cheer to this lazy premise. Sure, the addition of Christina Hendricks was nice and her off-putting character went very well alongside Billy Bob Thornton, but it really isn't enough to say that this film is worth paying to see. If you are to venture to the cinema to see this film, the payoff between Thurman and Willie will be worth the wait.

Bad Santa 2 brings on Mark Waters to direct, and while his filmography can either be hit or miss from Mean Girls all the way down to Vampire Academy, he did seem like a proper fit if anyone was going to fill these shoes. On top of that, aside from a couple of projects, the writers in Johnny Rosenthal and Shauna Cross felt like a safe gamble. Sadly, their first impression left a pretty lukewarm taste in my mouth. It was almost as if they watched the first film on a loop and tried to create the same magic, but without a few core characters that are sadly no longer with us. Having too much drama and crude humour is never a good thing, especially when you are trying to set yourself apart from a film that is a classic for those reasons alone. There were so many missed opportunities for better jokes throughout the course of this film.

I have chosen to leave out aspects involving Kathy Bates' character, due to the fact that she came off as more of an annoying side character that ended up forcing laughs on the audience. There are numerous annoyances throughout this film, but only due to the fact that they tarnished the past. I have become such a fan of the original film that I was destined to be underwhelmed by Bad Santa 2, even though my expectations were astronomically low. In the end, there are some great character moments in Thurman and Willie, as well as a few laugh-out-loud gags, but the rest of the film relies too heavily on nostalgia and using curse words, that the film begins to wear out by the final act, which is a little too dark for its own good.

Bad Santa 2 shows absolutely no reason why it was made, except to display a little bit of heart for the holiday season. It is by no means a bad film, but I will take the original over this sequel any day of the week. Its intentions are there, but there just isn't enough material left to create a franchise. For fans of the original, you will probably find quite a few jokes, and for that reason, I can recommend it, but as a whole, it just isn't that great of a film. This film is a rental at best and would have been better as a Blu-Ray/DVD release.
