I've never and will never be the biggest Kevin James fan. He uses his everyman likability to disguise the fact that, honestly, he's not a very good comedic actor. I'm not saying that's fact, it's just my opinion. Plus he seems like one of those kinds of guys who puts on a likable face on-screen but is really an asshole off it. Maybe that's just me, but that's how I see him being. It's been one year since Sandler released his first Netflix movie, the awful Ridiculous Six. So it shouldn't be any surprise that Sandler, through this Netflix deal, managed to score a SERIES for his buddy Rob Schneider, fucking seriously, and a Netflix original movie for his other buddy Kevin James. Maybe I'm wrong about the latter, since this movie isn't actually produced by Sandler's film company Happy Madison, but I'm sure Sandler helped connect the two parties even if his company didn't produce this film. Admittedly speaking, I don't really even know why I watched this in retrospect. I mentioned on my twitter that I wanted to watch something stupid and that I'd probably regret that decision later. Now, almost a day removed from having actually watched the film, would I say that I regretted watching it? I don't know if I would go so far as to say regret, but I would say that this was a missed opportunity. Much like Ricky Gervais' Netflix original film Special Correspondents. It's not that I expected this to be an all-time great comedy of epic proportions, but there's potential here to tell a broad, but slightly entertaining, film if you just gave it the right treatment. It didn't get the right treatment, let's just say that right now. It's not actively awful like, say, The Ridiculous Six or The Do-Over, but it's not what one would call a very funny movie. The problem is that I don't know if the movie was legitimately trying to be funny. Like there's some scenes that just fall flat on their ass and you're like 'that can't be the punchline, there has to be something else.' But no, there's not and then they move on to the next scene. There's a couple of chuckles here and there, but is that really enough to save the movie? Of course not, it needed far more than that. The problem, to me, is the fact that, as I mentioned, Kevin James just isn't that good at his job and he's definitely very limited as to what he can do. You needed a more dynamic performer than he to help elevate material this weak. Like a Jonah Hill, for example. And that's just as an example, cause he never would have done this. Maybe he could have also lent a hand with the script, which James could not do. So, yes, the movie is unfunny, but I don't feel that it crossed the line into awful at any point. Which, honestly, is a welcome surprise from a film from Sandler or any one of his buddies. This isn't Paul Blart 2, not to worry. I will say that the movie got slightly better as it went along and, really, the only entertaining part of the film is Kim Coates as the U.S selected president of Venezuela. His role is, literally, all of 5 minutes, which is a shame, cause I found him entertaining. If the movie had more of him and you got to see the political machinations of the U.S at play, it would have given the film a bit of a satirical edge. They weren't going for that, obviously, but still. It would have been something of interest. The film is fairly basic outside of that. It involves political assassinations, but it's not even as interesting as it sounds on paper. The rest of the cast is fine, nothing to write home about. There are some talented people here, but you would never actually know it from the way they were utilized. One thing that was refreshing is to have seen the fact that there was no romantic subplot between Kevin James and Zulay Henao because, I mean, let's be serious here. Seriously though, at least they didn't try to cram it in there even if it didn't make sense. With that said, this isn't a good movie at all. It's below average at best, but if you love Sandler and his buddies and were disappointed at Sandler's first two Netflix flicks, then this will be like The Godfather for you. Still not a good movie though. Netflix original comedies need to step up their game
